once upon a time there was nothing and
in the blink of an eye there was
everything and maybe it wasn't the first
time we know it as the Big Bang the
creation of our universe billions of
years ago but what if you could put it
all in Reverse
and everything shrank back to a single
point could this be the way the universe
ends
turn your TV on an empty channel with
the cable switched off those black and
white dots you see dancing around your
screen are an imprint of cosmic
microwave background the CMBS are
clearly visible through the microwave
telescopes astronomers use but that
static on your TV is also an afterglow
of the energy release during the Big
Bang scientists are pretty sure the Big
Bang happened around 13.8 billion years
ago the universe was condensed in this
single dot with the most extreme density
and heat then it exploded into a
colossal overheated ball of plasma that
cooled down as it expanded further with
time the formation of the first stars
and galaxies happen but the stretching
never stopped it's still going every
second at a tremendous speed this is why
all the objects in the universe are
continuously moving away from each other
we know this because the light from
other galaxies around us behaves a bit
strange
it appears redder than it should be this
happens when the source of light moves
away from the observer something called
the redshift at the same time gravity
pulls all objects in space to each other
it's why our planets orbit the Sun why
our solar system orbits the center of
the Milky Way
it's why your feet stay on the ground
with the attraction of gravity in mind
there came an idea one day it'll
overcome the push of the Big Bang and
the universe will start to shrink back
it'll be known as the Big Crunch
[Music]
how probable the Big Crunch is will
depend on the type of universe we live
in we may live in an open universe in
this case the expansion is too powerful
to ever be stopped
so it'll continue forever but the
density of our super stretched out open
universe will become so little galaxies
will fail to produce new stars existing
stars will fade away they'll go dark and
the universe will lose all the heat it
once had it'll keep spreading thinly
into the endless cold and dark Beyond
it'll be called the big freeze but it'll
take many billions of years to get to
this point so no worries for us right
now
we may also live in a flat universe
which has nothing to do with the actual
shape it means the universe will expand
until the pushing force of the Big Bang
becomes equal to the pull of gravity
eventually the universe will simply
stand still it'll be too cold at this
point so it's like another big freeze
situation the Big Crunch will only
happen if we live in a closed universe
that means it's dense enough to start
shrinking after it reaches the point of
maximum expansion scientists are trying
to learn how dense our universe is on
average by the looks of it it's not
dense enough for the Big Crunch to
happen so we're left with a possible big
freeze in the end but the universe
probably consists of more of the stuff
we can't see than of planets stars and
galaxies in terms of energy the visible
universe is just 5% of everything there
is so what's the rest
mysterious Dark Matter makes up 27% some
galaxies would fly apart much quicker if
there wasn't anything to keep them in
place this is how experts know Dark
Matter exists it's like glue holding
everything together
it shows the gravitational pull of the
universe to be much stronger than
initially thought yet there's still 68
percent of the universe left astronomers
think it's something called dark energy
another force we still can't properly
observe but scientists have seen how it
affects the universe expansion grows
without gravity slowing it down whatever
dark energy really is it pushes matter
in all directions just like the Big Bang
does one of the ideas about its nature
says it's the energy of empty space
itself meaning it grows as empty space
grows if that's true the speed of the
universe's expansion will grow faster
and faster yet it doesn't it's steady
with no acceleration dark energy still
has a lot of mysteries we can't figure
out for now
we also can entirely rule out the Big
Crunch based on our limited knowledge of
the universe if it happens it'll
probably start with a gentle halt of
expansion then the universe will begin
to move backward the light of other
galaxies would shift the other way
around remember how they go red when
they move away now their light will look
blue as these galaxies move toward us as
galaxies get closer to each other
they'll start to collide and merge
they'll wrap around each other whole
giant stars will shoot out from them and
others will mix around by immense
gravitational forces supergiant black
holes and galactic centers will attract
each other
and start to orbit and accelerate up to
half the speed of light imagine throwing
a stone into a comp on the whole surface
will get disturbed by ripples let's say
the pond is the universe and the splash
from the rock is the moment two black
holes collide and start to merge reality
itself gets disturbed by gravitational
waves from such a monstrous event
multiply all of this by a lot and you'll
get a vague picture of what a shrinking
universe could be like after billions of
years massive clusters filled with
galaxies will shrink into a single area
of space a huge super galaxy will start
to form countless collisions and merging
stars will make space itself as hot as
or even hotter than our Sun it won't
escape the immense pull of the ultimate
black hole in the center eventually
everything will get pulled into it and
there will be nothing else in the
universe except a single dot of
singularity sounds like the beginning of
the story about the Big Bang doesn't it
many proponents of the Big Crunch theory
believe that after the universe becomes
a hot and almost infinitely dense
singularity it will once again lead to a
new Big Bang this idea is called the Big
Bounce and it suggests that the universe
is going through cycles of expansion and
contractions like blowing up a balloon
letting all the air out and doing it
again this bouncing would also answer
the biggest question out there what was
before at the Big Bang
well another universe that was too dense
to expand forever and shrank back into a
dot what if we were actually living in a
second or third-generation universe or a
thousand
just like the continuing expansion of
the universe will take too many billions
of years for people to really worry
about its end so will it's possible
shrinking it'll include both the
formation and end of countless stars and
even galaxies before things get really
dramatic that is of course if it's even
possible for the Big Crunch to ever
happen